README.md, before:

# PCG Random Number Generation, C++ Edition

[![Maintenance Status](https://img.shields.io/badge/status-maintained-brightgreen.svg)](https://github.com/Total-Random/pcg-cpp)
[![CI](https://github.com/Total-Random/pcg-cpp/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/Total-Random/pcg-cpp/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT%2FApache--2.0-blue.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![Version](https://img.shields.io/badge/version-1.0-blue.svg)](CMakeLists.txt)

[PCG-Random website]: http://www.pcg-random.org

This is the **maintained** version of the PCG C++ library, hosted by the **Total-Random** organization. We have taken over maintenance to ensure this statistically excellent family of random number generators continues to work seamlessly on modern systems and compilers.

## Why this fork?

The original repository by Melissa O'Neill (`imneme/pcg-cpp`) has been a cornerstone of the C++ ecosystem but hasn't seen updates in several years. **Total-Random** exists to keep such vital legacy libraries alive by integrating community fixes, supporting new architectures, and fixing build breakages on modern IDEs.

### Key Improvements in this Fork:
- **Windows ARM64 Support**: Native support for MSVC on ARM64 architectures (Surface Pro, Apple Silicon via VM, etc.) using `__umulh` intrinsics.
- **Improved MSVC Compatibility**: Fixed ambiguous operator errors (`C2678`) in `set_stream` and `operator>>`.
- **Optimized `unxorshift`**: Implemented an optimized version of the inverse xorshift operation, improving performance for large integer types.
- **Consistent Typing**: Unified integer type handling across different platforms to avoid compiler warnings and errors.

## About PCG

PCG is a family of simple fast space-efficient statistically good algorithms for random number generation. Unlike many common generators, it's not just "good enough" — it passes the most stringent statistical tests while being faster and smaller than most alternatives.

For full details on the theory and performance, visit the [PCG-Random website].

## Usage

This is a **header-only** library. To use it, simply add the `include` directory to your project's include path and:

```cpp
#include "pcg_random.hpp"

// Standard 32-bit PCG generator
pcg32 rng;

// Seed it (optional, uses a fixed seed by default)
rng.seed(pcg_extras::seed_seq_from<std::random_device>{});

// Generate a number
uint32_t x = rng();
```

- Use `pcg32` for 32-bit output.
- Use `pcg64` for 64-bit output (now highly optimized for 64-bit systems and ARM64).

## Building Demos & Tests

While the library itself is header-only, we provide tests and samples:

### Unix-style (Linux, macOS, MinGW)
```bash
make
make test
```

### Modern CMake (All Platforms)
This is the recommended way to build and integrate the library:

```bash
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ..
cmake --build .
ctest .
```

### Windows (MSVC)
This fork is specifically patched to support building with Visual Studio 2019/2022. You can use the CMake instructions above to generate a Visual Studio solution, or simply include the headers directly in your project.

## Directory Structure

* `include/` — The core library (headers).
* `sample/` — Readable examples showing how to use the high-level API.
* `test-high/` — Functional and statistical tests.

## Maintenance & Contributions

We welcome bug fixes and compatibility patches. If you find an issue, especially on newer hardware or compiler versions, please open an issue or pull request in the [Total-Random/pcg-cpp](https://github.com/Total-Random/pcg-cpp) repository.

## License

This code is distributed under the **Apache License, Version 2.0** or the **MIT License**, at your option. See the header of each file for details.

---
*Maintained with ❤️ by the Total-Random Team.*

Commit message:

Add CREDITS.md and attribution comments in code as suggested by community

README.md, after:

# PCG Random Number Generation, C++ Edition

[![Maintenance Status](https://img.shields.io/badge/status-maintained-brightgreen.svg)](https://github.com/Total-Random/pcg-cpp)
[![CI](https://github.com/Total-Random/pcg-cpp/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/Total-Random/pcg-cpp/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT%2FApache--2.0-blue.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![Version](https://img.shields.io/badge/version-1.0-blue.svg)](CMakeLists.txt)

[PCG-Random website]: http://www.pcg-random.org

This is the **maintained** version of the PCG C++ library, hosted by the **Total-Random** organization. We have taken over maintenance to ensure this statistically excellent family of random number generators continues to work seamlessly on modern systems and compilers.

## Why this fork?

The original repository by Melissa O'Neill (`imneme/pcg-cpp`) has been a cornerstone of the C++ ecosystem but hasn't seen updates in several years. **Total-Random** exists to keep such vital legacy libraries alive by integrating community fixes, supporting new architectures, and fixing build breakages on modern IDEs.

### Key Improvements in this Fork:
- **Windows ARM64 Support**: Native support for MSVC on ARM64 architectures (Surface Pro, Apple Silicon via VM, etc.) using `__umulh` intrinsics.
- **Improved MSVC Compatibility**: Fixed ambiguous operator errors (`C2678`) in `set_stream` and `operator>>`.
- **Optimized `unxorshift`**: Implemented an optimized version of the inverse xorshift operation, improving performance for large integer types.
- **Consistent Typing**: Unified integer type handling across different platforms to avoid compiler warnings and errors.

Detailed information about integrated community fixes and contributors can be found in [CREDITS.md](CREDITS.md).

## About PCG

PCG is a family of simple fast space-efficient statistically good algorithms for random number generation. Unlike many common generators, it's not just "good enough" — it passes the most stringent statistical tests while being faster and smaller than most alternatives.

For full details on the theory and performance, visit the [PCG-Random website].

## Usage

This is a **header-only** library. To use it, simply add the `include` directory to your project's include path and:

```cpp
#include "pcg_random.hpp"

// Standard 32-bit PCG generator
pcg32 rng;

// Seed it (optional, uses a fixed seed by default)
rng.seed(pcg_extras::seed_seq_from<std::random_device>{});

// Generate a number
uint32_t x = rng();
```

- Use `pcg32` for 32-bit output.
- Use `pcg64` for 64-bit output (now highly optimized for 64-bit systems and ARM64).

## Building Demos & Tests

While the library itself is header-only, we provide tests and samples:

### Unix-style (Linux, macOS, MinGW)
```bash
make
make test
```

### Modern CMake (All Platforms)
This is the recommended way to build and integrate the library:

```bash
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ..
cmake --build .
ctest .
```

### Windows (MSVC)
This fork is specifically patched to support building with Visual Studio 2019/2022. You can use the CMake instructions above to generate a Visual Studio solution, or simply include the headers directly in your project.

## Directory Structure

* `include/` — The core library (headers).
* `sample/` — Readable examples showing how to use the high-level API.
* `test-high/` — Functional and statistical tests.

## Maintenance & Contributions

We welcome bug fixes and compatibility patches. If you find an issue, especially on newer hardware or compiler versions, please open an issue or pull request in the [Total-Random/pcg-cpp](https://github.com/Total-Random/pcg-cpp) repository.

## License

This code is distributed under the **Apache License, Version 2.0** or the **MIT License**, at your option. See the header of each file for details.

---
*Maintained with ❤️ by the Total-Random Team.*
